# Глава из Uptodate

Глава из Uptodate

    

            Etiology and diagnosis of tinnitus
Author:
Elizabeth A Dinces, MD
Section Editor:
Daniel G Deschler, MD, FACS
Deputy Editor:
Lisa Kunins, MD
All topics are updated as new evidence becomes available and our peer review process is complete.
Literature review current through: Apr 2022. | This topic last updated: Oct 06, 2021.
INTRODUCTIONTinnitus is a perception of sound in proximity to the head in the absence of an external source. It can be perceived as being within one or both ears, within or around the head, or as an outside distant noise. The sound is often a buzzing, ringing, or hissing, although it can also sound like other noises.
Tinnitus can be continuous or intermittent. Although both may have a significant impact on the patient, the latter is not usually related to a serious underlying medical problem. The sound may be pulsatile or non-pulsatile. Pulsatile tinnitus raises more concern for underlying significant pathology, though non-pulsatile tinnitus may also be associated with underlying disease.
The epidemiology, pathogenesis, and diagnosis of tinnitus will be reviewed here. The treatment of tinnitus is discussed separately. (See "Treatment of tinnitus".)
EPIDEMIOLOGYAccording to the American Tinnitus Association, an estimated 50 million people in the United States have chronic tinnitus, persisting for greater than six months [1]. For 12 million, it is severe enough to interfere with daily activities. These people are effectively disabled by their tinnitus to varying degrees.
Tinnitus can occur in children [2] and increases with age [3,4]. Tinnitus is more common in men than in women and is more likely to occur among individuals who smoke [1].
CLINICAL IMPACTThe impact of tinnitus on an individual can be significant. Some individuals "experience" tinnitus, while others "suffer from it." Overall, about 25 percent of tinnitus sufferers report an increase in tinnitus severity over time [5]. Chronic tinnitus is unlikely to remit completely but often becomes less bothersome over time, especially in the setting of hearing loss.
The impact of tinnitus can be consistently measured by two outcome instruments: the Tinnitus Handicap Inventory (form 1) [6] and the Tinnitus Reaction Questionnaire [7]. Studies indicate that the degree of disability perceived by tinnitus patients, and its impact on the patient's quality of life, does not directly correlate with loudness, type of tinnitus, or length of time with tinnitus.
Concurrent mood disorders can increase the perception of disability. Increased tinnitus disability also has been demonstrated in patients with insomnia [8].
PATHOGENESISTinnitus can be unilateral or bilateral and can be triggered anywhere along the auditory pathway (figure 1) [9]. It is believed to be encoded in neurons within the auditory cortex. The majority of patients have "sensorineural" tinnitus due to hearing loss at the cochlea or cochlear nerve level.
Somatic sounds may be perceived as tinnitus and originate in structures with proximity to the cochlea. These sounds are often generated in vascular structures but may also be produced by musculoskeletal structures. Somatic sounds are most often associated with pulsatile tinnitus and are typically unilateral. Continuous tonal tinnitus (single pure-tone) is usually not somatic in origin.
Pathogenetic theories postulate that the central nervous system is the source or "generator" of all tinnitus that does not have a somatic origin, even in patients whose associated hearing losses are due to cochlear injury [10]. Tinnitus generated by the central nervous system can be unilateral or bilateral, and the side of the tinnitus may not always correspond with the side of initial injury. Positron-emission tomography (PET) scanning and functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies indicate that the loss of cochlear input to neurons in the central auditory pathways (such as occurs with cochlear hair cell damage due to ototoxicity, noise trauma, or a lesion of the cochlear nerve) can result in abnormal neural activity in the auditory cortex. Such activity has been linked to the perception of tinnitus [11,12].
Another construct likens tinnitus to phantom pain perception that is thought to arise from a loss of suppression of neural activity [13-15]. Known neural feedback loops act to help tune and reinforce auditory memory in the central auditory cortex. Disruption of auditory input or the feedback loop may lead to the creation of alternative neural synapses and to loss of inhibition of normal synapses.
Tinnitus has also been likened to a type of auditory seizure [16], and antiseizure medications have had limited success in some patients [17]. Abnormal auditory-evoked magnetic field potentials associated with tinnitus can be suppressed in selected patients with intravenous lidocaine [18], confirming a central tinnitus phenomenon and potentially indicating a physiologic mechanism for lidocaine sensitive tinnitus. (See "Treatment of tinnitus", section on 'Medications'.)
Electrical stimulation, with round window electrodes or promontory stimulation, can suppress tinnitus in patients with profound hearing loss [19,20]. Electrical promontory stimulation may suppress abnormal spontaneous activity of cochlear nerve fibers; alternatively, it may provide background activity that acts to suppress abnormal central neural connections in patients with baseline sensorineural hearing loss and tinnitus. Cochlear implantation for hearing loss has had a secondary result of relieving tinnitus, with reported success for tinnitus improvement varying from 34 to 93 percent [21,22].
Many patients with tinnitus exhibit signs of anxiety and/or depression [23], and elevated serum serotonin levels have been found in some tinnitus patients [24]. Serotonin and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors are found throughout the auditory system, and neurotransmitter abnormalities may play a role in some patients with tinnitus [24-26].
These theories encompass disruption of normal neural firing patterns along the entire auditory pathway, from the end organ to the auditory cortex. They may explain tinnitus in patients who do not exhibit hearing loss, as well as in patients who recover from temporary hearing loss (eg, noise-induced hearing loss) but develop tinnitus that is persistent.
ETIOLOGY
Vascular disorders — Pulsatile tinnitus is most commonly, though not exclusively, vascular in etiology. Some vascular tinnitus, such as venous hums and tinnitus due to atherosclerotic plaque narrowing of vessels, can be non-pulsatile. Vascular tinnitus can be unilateral or bilateral; when bilateral, it is typically louder on the side of the pathology.
In a retrospective review of 84 patients with pulsatile tinnitus seen in a neurology department, 42 percent were found to have a significant vascular disorder (most commonly a dural arteriovenous fistula [AVF] or a carotid-cavernous sinus fistula) [27]. In 12 patients (14 percent), nonvascular disorders such as paraganglioma or intracranial hypertension (due to a variety of causes) explained the tinnitus.
Arterial bruits — Arterial vessels near the temporal bone may transmit sounds associated with turbulent blood flow, especially if the loudness of the sound exceeds the hearing threshold in that ear. The petrous carotid system is the most common source, although other arteries may also be involved [28]. An arterial bruit is not itself a serious condition, although the patient may require an evaluation for underlying atherosclerotic disease.
These patients usually do not have other otologic complaints (eg, hearing loss, vertigo, aural fullness). As with many other causes of tinnitus, their tinnitus is greatest in quiet environments (eg, at night).
Arteriovenous shunts — Congenital arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) are rarely associated with hearing loss or tinnitus. AVFs are more likely to be symptomatic, usually ipsilateral to the fistula. Dural AVFs are often associated with dural venous sinus thrombosis, which may occur spontaneously or be associated with infection, tumor, trauma, or surgery. Large dural AVFs can result in intracranial hemorrhage; early detection and treatment (surgery and/or vascular embolization) can be life-saving for high-grade lesions. (See "Nonaneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage", section on 'Intracranial'.)
Paraganglioma — Head and neck paragangliomas are highly vascular, typically benign neoplasms arising from cells of the paraganglia that are found around the carotid bifurcation, within the jugular bulb, or along the tympanic arteries in the middle ear. Tympanic paragangliomas, previously known as glomus tympanicum tumors, and jugular bulb paragangliomas, commonly known as glomus jugulare, both commonly cause a loud pulsing tinnitus that may interfere with hearing. The tinnitus is typically unilateral, and the lesion may be visible through the tympanic membrane as a reddish or blue mass or may be palpable in the neck. As the tumor enlarges, it may cause hearing loss because of impingement on the ossicular chain (conductive loss) or the labyrinth or cochlea (sensorineural loss). Other cranial nerves may also be affected (eg, facial nerve or lower cranial nerve palsies). Paragangliomas of the head and neck are discussed separately. (See "Paragangliomas: Epidemiology, clinical presentation, diagnosis, and histology", section on 'Definition and anatomic origin' and "Paragangliomas: Epidemiology, clinical presentation, diagnosis, and histology", section on 'Head and neck paragangliomas'.)
Venous hums — These may be heard in patients with systemic hypertension, increased intracranial pressure (often due to pseudotumor cerebri) (see "Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (pseudotumor cerebri): Clinical features and diagnosis", section on 'Pulsatile tinnitus'), or in patients with a dehiscent or dominant jugular bulb (abnormally high placement of the jugular bulb). The latter may also cause a conductive hearing loss. Tinnitus in patients with a venous hum is often described as a soft, low-pitched hum that may decrease or stop with pressure over the jugular vein, with a change in head position, or with activity [28]. When tinnitus is due to asymmetry in the venous system, the tinnitus can be unilateral, or bilateral but louder on one side.
Neurologic disorders — Pulsatile tinnitus of muscular origin can result from spasm of one or both of the muscles within the middle ear (the tensor tympani and the stapedius muscle). These muscles are innervated by cranial nerves V and VII respectively. Such muscle spasms can occur spontaneously, because of local otologic disease, and also in the presence of neurologic disease such as multiple sclerosis. Patients may also complain of hearing loss or aural fullness associated with these muscle spasms. Tympanometry and otoscopy can be particularly useful in diagnosing middle ear spasmodic activity.
Clicking noises or irregular or rapid pulsations may also result from myoclonus of the palatal muscles that attach to the Eustachian tube orifice. Myoclonus of the palatal muscles most often is caused by an underlying neurologic abnormality, such as multiple sclerosis, microvascular disease affecting the brainstem, or neuropathy related to metabolic or toxic etiology; the history and physical examination should include a search for other neurologic disease.
Tinnitus due to myoclonus can be either unilateral or bilateral; when unilateral, symptoms are ipsilateral to the site of the muscle spasm.
Eustachian tube dysfunction — A patulous Eustachian tube can cause unilateral or bilateral tinnitus, with sounds similar to an ocean roar that may be synchronous with respiration [28]. It most commonly occurs after significant weight loss or after external beam radiation to or near the nasopharynx. The symptoms may disappear when the patient lies down. Patients can also complain of an unusual awareness of their own voice (autophony) and of ear discomfort. The cause of these symptoms is a Eustachian tube that remains abnormally patent, allowing too much and then too little aeration of the middle ear space with respiration. (See "Eustachian tube dysfunction", section on 'History'.)
Other somatic disorders — Somatic non-pulsatile tinnitus is commonly caused by temporomandibular joint (TMJ) dysfunction [29] and has also been associated with whiplash injuries [30] and other cervical-spinal disorders [31]. Tinnitus may improve when patients respond favorably to treatment for symptoms of TMJ dysfunction and craniocervical disease. The exact neurophysiologic mechanism for the generation of tinnitus from either the TMJ or the cervical spine is not known but may involve disinhibition of the dorsal cochlear nucleus [30]. In cases of somatic tinnitus, unilateral or bilateral symptoms may occur.
Tinnitus with a machine-like grinding or pulsing character is sometimes associated with intracranial lesions, such as chondrosarcoma, aberrant carotid artery, and endolymphatic sac tumors.
Tinnitus originating from the auditory system — Most tinnitus is due to a sensorineural hearing loss with resulting dysfunction within the auditory system. The auditory system includes the cochlear end organ, the cochlear nerve (with its projections to and from the cochlea), the brainstem (site of the cochlear nuclei), and the primary and secondary auditory cortical projections (figure 1).
Etiologies of tinnitus generated from within the auditory system are as varied as the types of noises that patients report (table 1). The presence of tinnitus often is an early indicator of cochlear hair cell dysfunction or loss, as in the case of prolonged noise exposure [32], Meniere disease (also characterized by aural fullness and vertigo), or ototoxicity. (See "Etiology of hearing loss in adults", section on 'Inner ear causes' and "Meniere disease: Evaluation, diagnosis, and management", section on 'Clinical presentation'.)
Ototoxic medications — Tinnitus is commonly caused by ototoxic medications (table 2); the ototoxicity typically affects both sides, causing bilateral symptoms. Ototoxicity affects the various components of the cochleovestibular end organ. When such structures are damaged, a change in neural firing between the end organ and the remainder of the auditory system can be exhibited by hearing loss, distortions in hearing, or tinnitus. (See "Etiology of hearing loss in adults", section on 'Ototoxic substances'.)
Presbycusis — Presbycusis (sensorineural hearing loss with aging) or any acquired high-frequency hearing loss is commonly associated with tinnitus (often described as a high-pitched ringing sound, crickets, or bells in the ear) along with the hearing loss. Cochlear hearing losses can be asymmetric, and even when symmetric they can result in unilateral or bilateral tinnitus. (See "Presbycusis", section on 'Tinnitus'.)
Otosclerosis — This is a condition of abnormal bone repair of the stapes footplate bone (third bone in the ossicular chain) and of the otic capsule. Tinnitus can result when otosclerosis damages cochlear structures. Progressive otosclerosis can result in fixation of the stapes footplate and worsening conductive hearing loss which can be unilateral or bilateral. (See "Etiology of hearing loss in adults", section on 'Otosclerosis'.)
Vestibular schwannoma — Tumors compressing or stretching the cochlear nerve can cause tinnitus. In addition, unilateral tinnitus can be the presenting sign of a schwannoma of the vestibular nerve within the cerebellar-pontine angle or the internal auditory canal (acoustic neuroma). (See "Vestibular schwannoma (acoustic neuroma)".)
Chiari malformations — Tinnitus, unilateral or bilateral, is one of the auditory signs associated with a symptomatic Chiari malformation and occurs when low-lying cerebellar tonsils causes tension on the auditory nerve [33]. Tinnitus from Chiari malformations can be both unilateral or bilateral.
Other etiologies — Hearing loss due to a variety of causes, including vascular ischemic events, infection, nerve compression, genetic predisposition, congenital hearing loss, or endocrine or metabolic damage to the auditory system, can produce tinnitus to a variable degree.
Tinnitus may occur with barotrauma to the middle or inner ear (often associated with vertigo and hearing loss) and with fluid in the middle ear (eg, with otitis media). (See "Etiology of hearing loss in adults" and "Acute otitis media in adults", section on 'Otitis media with effusion'.)
DIAGNOSISTinnitus is frequently associated with hearing loss or other cochlear injury, and it may be the presenting complaint in a patient with a central nervous system lesion. History and physical examination are the first steps in establishing the etiology of tinnitus. Some patients may also warrant audiology examination, particularly those with unilateral tinnitus; although unilateral symptoms can direct aspects of the workup, it does not necessarily portend more worrisome diagnoses. Other tests, including imaging, are warranted in specific circumstances.
History — The history in patients with tinnitus should include a description of the tinnitus (episodic or constant, pulsatile or non-pulsatile, rhythmicity, pitch, quality of the sound), as well as inciting or alleviating factors. Patients should be asked about previous ear disease, noise exposure, hearing status, head injury, and symptoms suggesting temporomandibular joint (TMJ) syndrome. All medications and supplements should be reviewed. The history should review other medical conditions, including hypertension, atherosclerosis, neurologic illness, and prior surgery. Patients should be specifically asked about depression, anxiety, and insomnia, which can both exacerbate tinnitus and magnify its impact on quality of life. Patients complaining of tinnitus should also be asked if they have difficulty hearing or have noted a hearing loss.
Tinnitus that is distinctly pulsing or is described as rushing, flowing, or humming is usually vascular in origin. Patients often describe an increase in frequency and intensity with exercise, and some may recognize a connection with their pulse. Changes in intensity or pitch with head motion or body position (lying down versus sitting or standing) also strongly suggest a vascular tinnitus.
Clicking tinnitus almost always has a physiologic explanation. Myoclonus of the palatal muscles or middle ear structures can occur spontaneously but may also suggest significant neurologic disease. Some patients report a mechanical sounding tinnitus that is not tonal in nature. A diligent investigation searching for vascular or somatic causes is warranted for this rare complaint.
Tonal descriptions of tinnitus can help in the evaluation of a patient for a specific diagnosis or treatment.

A high-pitched continuous tone is by far the most commonly described type of tinnitus. High-pitched tinnitus is frequently a result of a sensorineural hearing loss or may suggest cochlear injury.
Low-pitched tinnitus is often seen in patients with Meniere disease, although it also can be idiopathic.

Physical examination — A complete head and neck examination, including cranial nerve examination and evaluation of the tympanic membrane, should be performed in all patients. Palatal myoclonus may be suppressed upon wide jaw opening; thus, its absence on oral examination does not rule out the diagnosis (nasopharyngoscopy may be indicated when suspicion is high).
In patients with suspected vascular tinnitus, auscultation over the neck, periauricular area, temple, orbit, and mastoid should be performed in various positions. The effects of positioning and vascular compression of the neck on the involved side should be noted. Tinnitus of venous origin can often be suppressed by careful pressure on the jugular vein.
Specialized testing
Suspected vascular tinnitus — Patients with infrequent episodes of pulsatile tinnitus or those with short-duration, mild tinnitus can be initially observed.
However, because frequent or constant pulsatile tinnitus can herald a potentially life-threatening illness, all of these patients require evaluation by an otolaryngologist or neurotologist. When physical examination does not reveal a specific vascular or musculoskeletal source in these patients, further investigation to rule out a central nervous system lesion such as a dural arteriovenous fistula (AVF), arteriovenous malformation (AVM) or aneurysm, or a skull base tumor should be carried out [34].
The gold standard for AVF diagnosing intracranial vascular lesions is angiography. These lesions often can also be diagnosed noninvasively with magnetic resonance (MR) angiography [35] or computed tomographic (CT) angiography [36]. High-resolution CT scanning is required to delineate the extent of involvement of the skull base if a paraganglioma is suspected and may be sufficient to evaluate other central nervous system lesions in selected patients. MRI can diagnose a Chiari malformation, vasculitis, central nervous system tumors, and multiple sclerosis and may indicate the presence of increased intracranial pressure (such as that seen in pseudotumor cerebri) or tumors. Many patients require both contrast MRI and contrast CT because of the varied nature of disorders that cause pulsatile tinnitus. If both of these studies are normal, and suspicion for a vascular lesion remains high, angiography or MR angiography is warranted.
Our protocol involves audiometric testing followed by an extensive history and physical exam, which guides additional diagnostic testing. When an intracranial vascular lesion is suspected, we obtain an MRI with contrast initially, followed by CT/CT angiography and subsequent interventional angiography in appropriate circumstances.
Suspected auditory system tinnitus — For patients with tinnitus associated with hearing loss or a change in hearing, audiometric tests may help determine if the tinnitus originates within the auditory system and are essential in the evaluation. Any patient with constant unilateral or bilateral tinnitus persistent for six months or more should also be referred for a formal audiology evaluation [37].
Initial audiometric tests should include a pure-tone audiogram, tympanometry, auditory reflex testing, determination of speech discrimination abilities, and otoacoustic emissions testing. These tests identify asymmetries between the two ears and indicate abnormalities in the middle ear, cochlea, and brainstem; as well, they can define the site of abnormality within the auditory system or confirm normal functioning. Such testing is performed in an audiologist's office, ideally one affiliated with an otolaryngology department or practice.
Asymmetry in hearing function, reflex testing, or otoacoustic emissions, in patients with no identified otologic abnormality, should be followed-up with auditory brainstem response testing (ABR) and imaging studies (eg, MRI) to rule out inner ear anomalies, central nervous system lesions, and neurologic disease. Further workup may involve neurologic or neurosurgical consultation, endocrine evaluation, or angiography.
SOCIETY GUIDELINE LINKSLinks to society and government-sponsored guidelines from selected countries and regions around the world are provided separately. (See "Society guideline links: Hearing loss and hearing disorders in adults".)
INFORMATION FOR PATIENTSUpToDate offers two types of patient education materials, "The Basics" and "Beyond the Basics." The Basics patient education pieces are written in plain language, at the 5th to 6th grade reading level, and they answer the four or five key questions a patient might have about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who want a general overview and who prefer short, easy-to-read materials. Beyond the Basics patient education pieces are longer, more sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are written at the 10th to 12th grade reading level and are best for patients who want in-depth information and are comfortable with some medical jargon.
Here are the patient education articles that are relevant to this topic. We encourage you to print or e-mail these topics to your patients. (You can also locate patient education articles on a variety of subjects by searching on "patient info" and the keyword(s) of interest.)

Basics topic (see "Patient education: Tinnitus (ringing in the ears) (The Basics)")
Beyond the Basics topic (see "Patient education: Tinnitus (ringing in the ears) (Beyond the Basics)")

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Tinnitus affects 50 million people in the United States and interferes with daily activity in a quarter of those affected. Prevalence is greater in men and increases with age. (See 'Epidemiology'above.)
Pulsatile tinnitus is most commonly vascular in origin and requires thorough evaluation.
Vascular tinnitus can be unilateral or bilateral; when bilateral, it is typically louder on the side of the pathology. Differential diagnosis includes intracranial arteriovenous malformation (AVM), arteriovenous fistula (AVF), arterial bruit, and paraganglioma. (See 'Vascular disorders'above.)
Clicking pulsatile tinnitus may indicate a neurologic disorder causing myoclonus of palatal muscles or of the muscles in the inner ear. Tinnitus can be either unilateral or bilateral; when unilateral, symptoms are ipsilateral to the site of the muscle spasm. (See 'Neurologic disorders'above.)
Tinnitus most commonly is a result of abnormalities within the auditory system, often with unexplained etiology. It may be associated with sensorineural hearing loss, ototoxic medications, infection, vascular ischemia, or acoustic neuroma. (See 'Tinnitus originating from the auditory system'above.)
All sensorineural tinnitus is believed to be generated within the central nervous system, with cochlear abnormalities leading to loss of inhibition of cortical auditory neurons. Serotonergic neurotransmitters may play a role. (See 'Pathogenesis'above.)
Evaluation of tinnitus should include a thorough history, an examination including auscultation for bruits in patients with possible vascular tinnitus, and a complete head and neck examination in all patients. (See 'Diagnosis'above.)
Patients with pulsatile tinnitus, other than those with infrequent intermittent symptoms, should have otolaryngologic investigation and may require contrast computed tomography (CT) scanning, contrast magnetic resonance (MR) scanning, and/or angiography. (See 'Suspected vascular tinnitus'above.)
For patients with tinnitus suspected of arising within the auditory system, and for those with unilateral tinnitus, audiometric testing is indicated. (See 'Suspected auditory system tinnitus'above.)

Use of UpToDate is subject to the Terms of Use.
REFERENCES

Shargorodsky J, Curhan GC, Farwell WR. Prevalence and characteristics of tinnitus among US adults. Am J Med 2010; 123:711.
Shetye A, Kennedy V. Tinnitus in children: an uncommon symptom? Arch Dis Child 2010; 95:645.
Adams PF, Hendershot GE, Marano MA, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/National Center for Health Statistics. Current estimates from the National Health Interview Survey, 1996. Vital Health Stat 10 1999; :1.
Ahmad N, Seidman M. Tinnitus in the older adult: epidemiology, pathophysiology and treatment options. Drugs Aging 2004; 21:297.
Stouffer JL, Tyler RS. Characterization of tinnitus by tinnitus patients. J Speech Hear Disord 1990; 55:439.
Newman CW, Sandridge SA, Jacobson GP. Psychometric adequacy of the Tinnitus Handicap Inventory (THI) for evaluating treatment outcome. J Am Acad Audiol 1998; 9:153.
Wilson PH, Henry J, Bowen M, Haralambous G. Tinnitus reaction questionnaire: psychometric properties of a measure of distress associated with tinnitus. J Speech Hear Res 1991; 34:197.
Folmer RL, Griest SE, Meikle MB, Martin WH. Tinnitus severity, loudness, and depression. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1999; 121:48.
Minen MT, Camprodon J, Nehme R, Chemali Z. The neuropsychiatry of tinnitus: a circuit-based approach to the causes and treatments available. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2014; 85:1138.
Qiu C, Salvi R, Ding D, Burkard R. Inner hair cell loss leads to enhanced response amplitudes in auditory cortex of unanesthetized chinchillas: evidence for increased system gain. Hear Res 2000; 139:153.
Melcher JR, Sigalovsky IS, Guinan JJ Jr, Levine RA. Lateralized tinnitus studied with functional magnetic resonance imaging: abnormal inferior colliculus activation. J Neurophysiol 2000; 83:1058.
Lockwood AH, Salvi RJ, Coad ML, et al. The functional neuroanatomy of tinnitus: evidence for limbic system links and neural plasticity. Neurology 1998; 50:114.
Lockwood AH, Salvi RJ, Burkard RF, et al. Neuroanatomy of tinnitus. Scand Audiol Suppl 1999; 51:47.
Møller AR. Similarities between chronic pain and tinnitus. Am J Otol 1997; 18:577.
Mühlnickel W, Elbert T, Taub E, Flor H. Reorganization of auditory cortex in tinnitus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998; 95:10340.
Shulman A, Goldstein B. Medical Significance of Tinnitus. Int Tinnitus J 1997; 3:45.
Sanchez TG, Balbani AP, Bittar RS, et al. Lidocaine test in patients with tinnitus: rationale of accomplishment and relation to the treatment with carbamazepine. Auris Nasus Larynx 1999; 26:411.
Shiomi Y, Nagamine T, Fujiki N, et al. Tinnitus remission by lidocaine demonstrated by auditory-evoked magnetoencephalogram. A preliminary report. Acta Otolaryngol 1997; 117:31.
Portmann M, Cazals Y, Negrevergne M, Aran JM. Temporary tinnitus suppression in man through electrical stimulation of the cochlea. Acta Otolaryngol 1979; 87:294.
Matsushima JI, Fujimura H, Sakai N, et al. A study of electrical promontory stimulation in tinnitus patients. Auris Nasus Larynx 1994; 21:17.
Ito J. Tinnitus suppression in cochlear implant patients. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1997; 117:701.
Miyamoto RT, Bichey BG. Cochlear implantation for tinnitus suppression. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 2003; 36:345.
Holgers KM, Zöger S, Svedlund K. Predictive factors for development of severe tinnitus suffering-further characterisation. Int J Audiol 2005; 44:584.
Simpson JJ, Davies WE. A review of evidence in support of a role for 5-HT in the perception of tinnitus. Hear Res 2000; 145:1.
Thompson GC, Thompson AM, Garrett KM, Britton BH. Serotonin and serotonin receptors in the central auditory system. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1994; 110:93.
Woods CI, Azeredo WJ. Noradrenergic and serotonergic projections to the superior olive: potential for modulation of olivocochlear neurons. Brain Res 1999; 836:9.
Waldvogel D, Mattle HP, Sturzenegger M, Schroth G. Pulsatile tinnitus--a review of 84 patients. J Neurol 1998; 245:137.
Fortune DS, Haynes DS, Hall JW 3rd. Tinnitus. Current evaluation and management. Med Clin North Am 1999; 83:153.
Ren YF, Isberg A. Tinnitus in patients with temporomandibular joint internal derangement. Cranio 1995; 13:75.
Levine RA. Somatic (craniocervical) tinnitus and the dorsal cochlear nucleus hypothesis. Am J Otolaryngol 1999; 20:351.
Montazem A. Secondary tinnitus as a symptom of instability of the upper cervical spine: operative management. Int Tinnitus J 2000; 6:130.
Griest SE, Bishop PM. Tinnitus as an early indicator of permanent hearing loss. A 15 year longitudinal study of noise exposed workers. AAOHN J 1998; 46:325.
Albers FW, Ingels KJ. Otoneurological manifestations in Chiari-I malformation. J Laryngol Otol 1993; 107:441.
Mundada P, Singh A, Lingam RK. CT arteriography and venography in the evaluation of Pulsatile tinnitus with normal otoscopic examination. Laryngoscope 2015; 125:979.
Dietz RR, Davis WL, Harnsberger HR, et al. MR imaging and MR angiography in the evaluation of pulsatile tinnitus. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 1994; 15:879.
Forsting M. CTA of the ICA bifurcation and intracranial vessels. Eur Radiol 2005; 15 Suppl 4:D25.
Tunkel DE, Bauer CA, Sun GH, et al. Clinical practice guideline: tinnitus executive summary. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2014; 151:533.

Topic 6855 Version 35.0
GRAPHICS
Tinnitus handicap inventory questionnaire
Reproduced with permission from Clinical Health Services, Inc. (http://www.clinicalhealthservices.com).
Graphic 64655 Version 3.0
Current concept of the auditory pathways
Courtesy of Elizabeth Dinces, MD.
Graphic 60823 Version 1.0
Causes of tinnitus








Sensorineural hearing loss




Presbycusis




Late-onset congenital hearing loss




Noise-induced hearing loss




Ototoxicity




Idiopathic




Vascular insufficiency




Small-vessel disease




Hypercoagulable states




Hypercholesterolemia




Diabetic vasculopathy




Hypertension




Sickle cell anemia




Other anemia




Bone disease




Fibrous dysplasia




Paget disease of bone




Osteogenesis imperfecta




Otosclerosis




Central nervous system anomalies




Sarcoid




Pseudotumor cerebri




Vascular malformations




Tumor




Stroke




Multiple sclerosis










Infections




Rubella




Neurosyphilis




Lyme disease




Meningitis




Chronic otitis media




Measles




Cytomegalovirus




Metabolic disorders




Thyroid disease




Diabetes mellitus




Chronic renal failure




Hyperparathyroidism




Autoimmune disease




Autoimmune inner ear disease (not always associated with systemic autoimmune disease)




Rheumatoid arthritis




Systemic lupus erythematosus




Cochlear injury




Salicylates




Antibiotics




Loop diuretics




Platinum-based chemotherapy




Meniere disease




Trauma




Drugs




See 'Cochlear injury' above and refer to UpToDate table on drugs that cause or exacerbate tinnitus.








Graphic 69431 Version 4.0
Some of the drugs that cause or exacerbate tinnitus




Aminoglycoside antibiotics




ACE inhibitors




Antimalarial drugs (eg, chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine)




Benzodiazepines




Bismuth




Calcium channel blockers




Carbamazepine




Chlordiazepoxide




Cisplatin




Clarithromycin




COX-2 inhibitors




Cyclobenzaprine




Dapsone




Doxazosin




Doxepin




Fluoroquinolone antibiotics




Isotretinoin




Lidocaine and other local anesthetics




Loop diuretics




Nitroprusside




Prazosin




Proton pump inhibitors




Quinidine




Salicylates and NSAIDs




Sertraline




Sibutramine




Tricyclic antidepressants




Tolbutamide




Valproic acid




ACE: angiotensin-converting enzyme; COX: cyclooxygenase; NSAIDs: nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs.
Graphic 68705 Version 3.0
 
Treatment of tinnitus
Author:
Elizabeth A Dinces, MD
Section Editor:
Daniel G Deschler, MD, FACS
Deputy Editor:
Lisa Kunins, MD
All topics are updated as new evidence becomes available and our peer review process is complete.
Literature review current through: Apr 2022. | This topic last updated: Oct 06, 2021.
INTRODUCTIONTinnitus is a perception of sound in proximity to the head in the absence of an external source. The sound may be a buzzing, ringing, or hissing, although it can also sound like other noises.
Tinnitus is most commonly associated with hearing loss, though it may be a presenting symptom of vascular or neurological abnormalities. Once a serious underlying medical condition has been ruled out, treatment should be directed at the symptom itself, which severely interferes with the quality of life in approximately 10 percent of patients with tinnitus [1].
This topic will review the treatment of tinnitus. The epidemiology, pathogenesis, and diagnosis of tinnitus are discussed separately. (See "Etiology and diagnosis of tinnitus".)
TREATMENTTreatment for tinnitus includes correcting identified comorbidities as well as directly addressing the effects of tinnitus on quality of life. For many patients, tinnitus is a chronic condition; goals of treatment are to lessen its impact and any associated disability, rather than to achieve absolute cure. Several treatment modalities have been studied, including behavioral treatments and medications, but the benefit for most of these interventions has not been conclusively demonstrated in randomized trials [2-4]. A comparative effectiveness study on treatment for tinnitus for the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality found that research is limited by the lack of data regarding measures to assess patients, and poorly collected data regarding adverse effects of a variety of interventions [4].
Associated factors — Prior to initiating therapy for tinnitus, it is important to address other associated conditions that can exacerbate tinnitus.
Depression — Patients with depression require appropriate treatment. In a randomized trial, treatment with nortriptyline 100 mg, compared with placebo, resulted in overall benefit for patients with disabling tinnitus (67 versus 40 percent), though tinnitus severity was insignificantly improved [5]. Suicidality may be increased in patients with tinnitus, but a cause and effect relationship is uncertain [6]. A meta-analysis of six randomized trials of antidepressants for treatment of tinnitus (four evaluating tricyclic antidepressants, one using paroxetine initiated at 10 mg daily, one studying trazodone) found evidence inconclusive for the effectiveness of antidepressants in this condition [7]. There was a suggestion of tinnitus improvement in a patient subgroup that received higher doses of paroxetine (50 mg) in one study [8], but this requires further evaluation.
Insomnia — Patients with tinnitus who have insomnia should be treated for their sleep disorder with the goal of reducing the severity of tinnitus [9]. (See "Overview of the treatment of insomnia in adults".)
Vascular abnormalities — Patients with vascular tinnitus may benefit from a variety of procedures. As examples, a bruit from an arteriovenous malformation (AVM), dural arteriovenous fistula (AVF), or dehiscent jugular bulb may be treated by ligation or embolization, and glomus tumors can be treated by angiographic embolization and surgical resection.
Reassurance for patients with venous hums or benign arterial variants causing pulsatile tinnitus may be helpful and is usually adequate. Rarely, surgical or angiographic ligation of the offending vessel is indicated for patients whose pulsatile tinnitus is so loud that it cannot be adequately treated with masking or other noninvasive treatment strategies and who experience significant impairment in their quality of life.
Presbycusis and other hearing loss — Hearing aids in patients with presbycusis usually result in an improvement in tinnitus symptoms.
Patients with conductive hearing loss due to outer ear or middle ear disease may benefit from surgery to correct the conductive defect (table 1). These patients may also derive some benefit from hearing aids if surgery is not an option.
Cochlear implantation is a well-accepted therapy in adults and children with severe hearing impairment who are not benefiting from hearing aids. Electrical stimulation of the auditory pathway is associated with a loss or reduction of tinnitus in 34 to 93 percent of patients receiving cochlear implants, although some individuals develop tinnitus postoperatively [10-13]. Cochlear implants are only available for selected patients and a full evaluation for candidacy is required before an implant can be considered.
Drug toxicity — Tinnitus due to ototoxic effects on the hair cells of the cochlea may be reversible in patients after stopping ototoxic medications (table 2). Often tinnitus is the first sign that ototoxicity is occurring and can herald more severe injury to the inner ear. Discontinuing these medications can prevent progression to hearing loss and/or balance systems dysfunction in some patients even if tinnitus does not resolve.
Other associated factors

Cochlear rescue medications are under investigation in patients with chemotherapy-induced tinnitus [14,15]. Investigational therapies aimed at protecting the inner ear from trauma (noise induced damage) will likely also reduce the incidence of tinnitus seen with such damage [16-18].
Metabolic and hormone imbalances, if present, should be corrected and may result in resolution of the tinnitus.
In patients with myoclonus of the palatal muscles or middle ear structures, treatment with botulinum toxin injections into the palate or sectioning of the tendons within the middle ear usually relieves the symptoms [19].
A patulous Eustachian tube can be treated with a variety of agents, including application of mucosal irritants (such as tetracycline) to the nasopharynx, which result in swelling or scarring of the Eustachian tube orifice [20]. If these treatments fail, surgery may be successful with placement of silicone plugs [21] through the middle ear, or various endoscopic techniques to close the nasopharyngeal orifice [22-24].

Behavioral therapies — A number of behavioral treatments have been studied with some success:

Tinnitus retraining therapy (TRT)
Biofeedback and stress reduction programs
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)

Multidisciplinary programs at tinnitus centers are available to assist patients with disabling tinnitus. A randomized trial, performed in an audiological referral center, compared a multidisciplinary stepped therapy approach (incorporating TRT and CBT and involving clinical psychologists, movement therapists, physical therapists, speech therapists, social workers, and audiologists) to usual care for 492 adult patients with tinnitus [25]. At 12 months, patients assigned to the stepped therapy had significant improvement in scores reflecting health-related quality of life, tinnitus impairment, and tinnitus severity.
Above all, patients should not be discouraged or advised that there are no treatment options.
Tinnitus retraining therapy — TRT is based upon bypassing or overriding abnormal auditory cortex neural connections. These therapies are performed at specialized tinnitus centers and in some audiologic practices; techniques vary among practitioners and each center has its own specific rates of success.
TRT is based on the principle that all levels of the auditory pathways and several nonauditory systems play essential roles in tinnitus; TRT enhances the role of nonauditory systems in determining the level of tinnitus annoyance [26]. TRT involves inducing and facilitating habituation to the tinnitus signal. The goal is to reach a stage in which patients are unaware of their tinnitus unless they specifically and consciously focus on it. Furthermore, even when perceived, tinnitus does not evoke annoyance. Habituation is achieved by directive counseling combined with low-level, broad-band noise generated by wearable generators, and environmental sounds, according to a specific protocol.
Significant improvement has been reported in as many as 80 percent of patients with high-pitched tinnitus using TRT with combined counseling and noise generators [26-29]. The long-term impact may be less reliable [30]. TRT can take one to two years before the patient no longer needs the external device.
In a systematic review that included only one randomized trial of 123 participants with tinnitus, TRT was more effective than tinnitus masking in improving symptoms [31].
Biofeedback and stress reduction — Biofeedback is a relaxation technique that teaches people to control certain autonomic body functions. The goal of biofeedback is to help people manage tinnitus-related distress by changing the patient's reaction to it. Many people notice a reduction in tinnitus when they are able to modify their reaction to it [32]. Biofeedback was first described as a stand-alone therapy for complex tinnitus in the 1980s and continues to be used as part of a battery of therapy options at many tinnitus centers.
Cognitive behavioral therapy — CBT is an intervention directed at teaching patients to alter their psychological response to their tinnitus by identifying and reinforcing coping strategies, distraction skills, and relaxation techniques [33]. Patients must be motivated, as they are required to keep diaries and perform homework as part of CBT. In a meta-analysis of 10 randomized trials evaluating different forms of CBT delivery (by therapists and over the internet), CBT improved tinnitus symptoms compared with non-CBT controls [2]. Self-help books have also been shown to benefit patients with troubling or disabling tinnitus [34]. Internet-delivered CBT, which is as effective as face-to-face CBT [35], and self-help books are especially useful in patients who cannot afford or access a formal CBT program.
Medications — Some medications may have modest efficacy in the treatment of tinnitus [36-38]:

Two small placebo-controlled trials of misoprostol, a prostaglandin E1 analogue, have suggested limited benefit [39,40], but further studies are needed.
Historically, lidocaine, either intratympanic or intravenous, has been found in observational studies to be modestly efficacious in reducing symptoms of tinnitus [41-43]. However, given the adverse effects of intravenous lidocaine that clearly outweigh any small benefits, lidocaine should not be used in the treatment of tinnitus [3].
Benzodiazepines (eg, alprazolam) have been found in small trials to be effective in the treatment of tinnitus [44,45] and are thought to act on the anxiety often associated with tinnitus.
Two small studies have shown efficacy of low doses of carbamazepinein treating rapid tapping pulsatile tinnitus in selected patients [37,38].
Intratympanic medications, such as dexamethasone, have been used with some success in patients with tinnitus, particularly in those with cochlear disease (eg, sudden hearing loss, autoimmune inner ear disease, Meniere disease) [46,47]. In a small randomized trial of patients with idiopathic tinnitus of less than three months’ duration, those who were assigned to combination intratympanic dexamethasone and oral alprazolamreported greater improvement in tinnitus symptoms, compared with oral alprazolam alone [48].

A number of other medications have been studied in patients with tinnitus but have not been found to be effective [49]:

Anticonvulsants do not appear to be effective in improving symptoms of tinnitus that is not tapping or staccato in nature. A systematic review and meta-analysis including seven randomized trials of patients with chronic tinnitus found no clinically meaningful effect on symptoms comparing anticonvulsants (gabapentin, carbamazepine, lamotrigine, and flunarizine) with placebo [50].
Ginkgo biloba and other bioflavonoids have been advertised to reduce tinnitus, but there is no evidence that ginkgo is effective for the treatment of tinnitus. (See "Clinical use of ginkgo biloba", section on 'Tinnitus'.)
Melatonin has also not been found effective in controlled studies of tinnitus therapy [51].
Niacinacts as a vasodilator and can potentially improve cochlear blood flow. However, niacin has not demonstrated clinical value in patients with long-standing tinnitus. No controlled studies have shown a significant benefit of niacin or other vitamins for tinnitus therapy.
Zinc-, copper-, and manganese-based superoxide dismutases scavenge free radicals in the inner ear [52]. Animal models suggest that deficiencies in these enzymes leads to increased death of cochlear hair cells [53,54]. Studies correlating zinc levels with tinnitus in humans, as well as randomized, controlled trials of zinc therapy for tinnitus, have had inconsistent results [55-58]. This evidence does not support the use of zinc supplementation for the treatment of tinnitus.

Other therapies — A number of other types of treatments have been studied in patients with tinnitus, most of which have not been found to be more effective than placebo. Nevertheless, many tinnitus support groups have members who are helped by the treatments described below and individual patients who respond may be experiencing a true, non-placebo benefit.
Masking — Masking devices resemble hearing aids and are designed to produce low-level sounds that reduce the perception of tinnitus [59]. Some patients report decrease in tinnitus with use of such devices, although there is no conclusive evidence from randomized trials to clarify the evidence of effectiveness. One systematic review of six randomized trials found significant risk of bias and differences in outcome measures and evaluation techniques that precluded a definitive assessment of efficacy [60].
Masking can also produce the phenomenon of residual inhibition, where the reduction or elimination of tinnitus perception continues for a short time after the masker is removed. One therapy under evaluation, phase-shift treatment, aims to enhance residual inhibition that results from masking. Similar to the concept used in sound cancellation headphones, phase shift therapy uses a sound wave that is phase-shifted 180 degrees from the patient's endogenous sound wave. Residual inhibition lasting one hour to seven days was reported in 42 percent of patients during active phase-shift treatment for two weeks, and in no patients during nontreatment control weeks, in a crossover study (n = 61) [61]. Further studies are needed to evaluate the long-term benefits of phase-shift treatment prior to clinical use.
Potential adverse effects of masking therapy include worsening of tinnitus, associated discomfort, or worsening hyperacusis.
For patients with tinnitus related to hearing loss, the use of an appropriately fitted hearing aid may act to mask the tinnitus. As with other masking strategies, the tinnitus tends to return some time after the hearing aid is removed. In a randomized trial comparing hearing aid use with a sound generator for tinnitus associated with hearing loss, both interventions had comparable benefits [62,63].
Masking may also be accomplished using or enhancing ambient background noise. Use of background music, sound machines, radios on low volume, fans, and pillow speakers have been helpful to patients with tinnitus that is especially bothersome in quiet environments.
Electrical stimulation — Electrical stimulation of the cochlea by directly placing electrodes on the bony cochlea or in the round window niche have resulted in tinnitus improvement in patients with hearing loss. Transcutaneous electrical stimulation is the only available electrical option that is not associated with a risk of causing hearing loss [64]. Electrical stimulation may be provided either through a single electrode or via multiply placed acupuncture needles over the mastoids or around the auricle.
In patients without hearing loss, however, electrical stimulation external to the middle or inner ear has not been demonstrated to be more effective for tinnitus suppression than placebo treatment; responses were approximately 38 to 43 percent for both groups [65,66].
Case reports of increasingly invasive procedures have been published including electrodes placement directly into a site in Heschl's gyrus that was mapped to respond to the tone of the perceived tinnitus [67]. This procedure was successful in one of two patients described.
In a case series of 21 patients with incapacitating tinnitus and unilateral deafness, cochlear implantation in the deaf ear resulted in reduction of tinnitus loudness and distress [68].
Acupuncture — Acupuncture, alone or in conjunction with electrical stimulation, has not been found to be more effective than placebo [69,70].
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation — Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) has been investigated in patients with different medical conditions (eg, movement disorders, seizures, and depression) and has shown modest effectiveness. However, in a systematic review that included five small randomized trials of patients with tinnitus (n = 233), there were limited data showing improvement in severity or disability of tinnitus with rTMS therapy [71]. A subsequent randomized trial in 64 participants with chronic tinnitus found that, compared with placebo, participants who received treatment with 10 consecutive days of rTMS were more likely to have improvement in tinnitus functional index (56 versus 22 percent) [72]. Improvements were sustained during the 26-week follow-up period.
rTMS appears to be safe in short-term treatment, but safety with long-term treatment is not known. Larger trials are needed to determine the conditions and parameters under which rTMS may be effective.
SOCIETY GUIDELINE LINKSLinks to society and government-sponsored guidelines from selected countries and regions around the world are provided separately. (See "Society guideline links: Hearing loss and hearing disorders in adults".)
INFORMATION FOR PATIENTSUpToDate offers two types of patient education materials, "The Basics" and "Beyond the Basics." The Basics patient education pieces are written in plain language, at the 5th to 6th grade reading level, and they answer the four or five key questions a patient might have about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who want a general overview and who prefer short, easy-to-read materials. Beyond the Basics patient education pieces are longer, more sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are written at the 10th to 12th grade reading level and are best for patients who want in-depth information and are comfortable with some medical jargon.
Here are the patient education articles that are relevant to this topic. We encourage you to print or e-mail these topics to your patients. (You can also locate patient education articles on a variety of subjects by searching on "patient info" and the keyword(s) of interest.)

Basics topics (see "Patient education: Tinnitus (ringing in the ears) (The Basics)")
Beyond the Basics topics (see "Patient education: Tinnitus (ringing in the ears) (Beyond the Basics)")

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

The goal of treatment, for most patients, is to lessen awareness of tinnitus and its impact on quality of life.
Treatment for tinnitus should be aimed at the underlying abnormality, when identified. We recommend treatment of underlying depression and insomnia, as these conditions may exacerbate symptoms of tinnitus (Grade 1B). Cochlear implants for patients with severe sensorineural hearing loss may improve tinnitus in 75 percent of patients. (See 'Associated factors'above.)
We recommend tinnitus retraining therapy (TRT), in the context of directive counseling, for patients who are significantly impacted by their tinnitus symptoms (Grade 1C). We suggest a trial of biofeedback or cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), which may also be helpful as an adjunct to TRT (Grade 2C). (See 'Behavioral therapies'above.)
Medications for tinnitus have limited effectiveness. (See 'Medications'above.)
Other medical treatments, including acupuncture and electrical stimulation (except for patients with profound hearing loss), are not demonstrably more effective than placebo. (See 'Other therapies'above.)

Use of UpToDate is subject to the Terms of Use.
REFERENCES

Ahmad N, Seidman M. Tinnitus in the older adult: epidemiology, pathophysiology and treatment options. Drugs Aging 2004; 21:297.
Hoare DJ, Kowalkowski VL, Kang S, Hall DA. Systematic review and meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials examining tinnitus management. Laryngoscope 2011; 121:1555.
Baguley D, McFerran D, Hall D. Tinnitus. Lancet 2013; 382:1600.
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Evaluation and treatment of tinnitus: Comparative effectiveness. 2013. http://effectivehealthcare.ahrq.gov/search-for-guides-reviews-and-reports/?pageaction=displayproduct&productID=1649 (Accessed on October 08, 2013).
Dobie RA, Sakai CS, Sullivan MD, et al. Antidepressant treatment of tinnitus patients: report of a randomized clinical trial and clinical prediction of benefit. Am J Otol 1993; 14:18.
Jacobson GP, McCaslin DL. A search for evidence of a direct relationship between tinnitus and suicide. J Am Acad Audiol 2001; 12:493.
Baldo P, Doree C, Molin P, et al. Antidepressants for patients with tinnitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012; :CD003853.
Robinson SK, Viirre ES, Bailey KA, et al. Randomized placebo-controlled trial of a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor in the treatment of nondepressed tinnitus subjects. Psychosom Med 2005; 67:981.
Folmer RL, Griest SE. Tinnitus and insomnia. Am J Otolaryngol 2000; 21:287.
Aschendorff A, Pabst G, Klenzner T, Laszig R. Tinnitus in Cochlear Implant Users: The Freiburg Experience. Int Tinnitus J 1998; 4:162.
Ito J. Tinnitus suppression in cochlear implant patients. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1997; 117:701.
Miyamoto RT, Bichey BG. Cochlear implantation for tinnitus suppression. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 2003; 36:345.
Quaranta N, Wagstaff S, Baguley DM. Tinnitus and cochlear implantation. Int J Audiol 2004; 43:245.
Campbell K, Meech R, Rybak L, Hughes L. The effect of D-methionine on cochlear oxidative state with and without cisplatin administration: mechanisms of otoprotection. Abstracts of the Twenty-third Midwinter Research Meeting, ARO. St. Petersburg, FL, 2000; #5039.
Pirvola U, Xing-Qun L, Virkkala J, et al. Rescue of hearing, auditory hair cells, and neurons by CEP-1347/KT7515, an inhibitor of c-Jun N-terminal kinase activation. J Neurosci 2000; 20:43.
Attias J, Sapir S, Bresloff I, et al. Reduction in noise-induced temporary threshold shift in humans following oral magnesium intake. Clin Otolaryngol Allied Sci 2004; 29:635.
Duan ML, Ulfendahl M, Laurell G, et al. Protection and treatment of sensorineural hearing disorders caused by exogenous factors: experimental findings and potential clinical application. Hear Res 2002; 169:169.
Feghali JG, Liu W, Van De Water TR. L-n-acetyl-cysteine protection against cisplatin-induced auditory neuronal and hair cell toxicity. Laryngoscope 2001; 111:1147.
Bryce GE, Morrison MD. Botulinum toxin treatment of essential palatal myoclonus tinnitus. J Otolaryngol 1998; 27:213.
Fortune DS, Haynes DS, Hall JW 3rd. Current evaluation and management. Med Clin North Am 1999; 83:153.
Sato T, Kawase T, Yano H, et al. Trans-tympanic silicone plug insertion for chronic patulous Eustachian tube. Acta Otolaryngol 2005; 125:1158.
Doherty JK, Slattery WH 3rd. Autologous fat grafting for the refractory patulous eustachian tube. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2003; 128:88.
Orlandi RR, Shelton C. Endoscopic closure of the eustachian tube. Am J Rhinol 2004; 18:363.
Grimmer JF, Poe DS. Update on eustachian tube dysfunction and the patulous eustachian tube. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2005; 13:277.
Cima RF, Maes IH, Joore MA, et al. Specialised treatment based on cognitive behaviour therapy versus usual care for tinnitus: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2012; 379:1951.
Jastreboff PJ, Gray WC, Gold SL. Neurophysiological approach to tinnitus patients. Am J Otol 1996; 17:236.
Herraiz C, Hernandez FJ, Plaza G, de los Santos G. Long-term clinical trial of tinnitus retraining therapy. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2005; 133:774.
Jastreboff PJ, Jastreboff MM. Tinnitus retraining therapy for patients with tinnitus and decreased sound tolerance. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 2003; 36:321.
Berry JA, Gold SL, Frederick EA, et al. Patient-based outcomes in patients with primary tinnitus undergoing tinnitus retraining therapy. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2002; 128:1153.
Dobie RA. A review of randomized clinical trials in tinnitus. Laryngoscope 1999; 109:1202.
Phillips JS, McFerran D. Tinnitus Retraining Therapy (TRT) for tinnitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010; :CD007330.
Andersson G, Lyttkens L. A meta-analytic review of psychological treatments for tinnitus. Br J Audiol 1999; 33:201.
Beukes EW, Andersson G, Allen PM, et al. Effectiveness of Guided Internet-Based Cognitive Behavioral Therapy vs Face-to-Face Clinical Care for Treatment of Tinnitus: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2018; 144:1126.
Kaldo V, Cars S, Rahnert M, et al. Use of a self-help book with weekly therapist contact to reduce tinnitus distress: a randomized controlled trial. J Psychosom Res 2007; 63:195.
Andersson G, Melin L, Hägnebo C, et al. A Review of psychological treatment approaches for patients suffering from tinnitus. Ann Behav Med 1995; 17:357.
Minen MT, Camprodon J, Nehme R, Chemali Z. The neuropsychiatry of tinnitus: a circuit-based approach to the causes and treatments available. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2014; 85:1138.
Levine RA. Typewriter tinnitus: a carbamazepine-responsive syndrome related to auditory nerve vascular compression. ORL J Otorhinolaryngol Relat Spec 2006; 68:43.
Brantberg K. Paroxysmal staccato tinnitus: a carbamazepine responsive hyperactivity dysfunction symptom of the eighth cranial nerve. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2010; 81:451.
Briner W, House J, O'Leary M. Synthetic prostaglandin E1 misoprostol as a treatment for tinnitus. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1993; 119:652.
Yilmaz I, Akkuzu B, Cakmak O, Ozlüoglu LN. Misoprostol in the treatment of tinnitus: a double-blind study. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2004; 130:604.
Murai K, Tyler RS, Harker LA, Stouffer JL. Review of pharmacologic treatment of tinnitus. Am J Otol 1992; 13:454.
Sakata H, Kojima Y, Koyama S, et al. Treatment of cochlear tinnitus with transtympanic infusion of 4% lidocaine into the tympanic cavity. Int Tinnitus J 2001; 7:46.
Otsuka K, Pulec JL, Suzuki M. Assessment of intravenous lidocaine for the treatment of subjective tinnitus. Ear Nose Throat J 2003; 82:781.
Jalali MM, Kousha A, Naghavi SE, et al. The effects of alprazolam on tinnitus: a cross-over randomized clinical trial. Med Sci Monit 2009; 15:PI55.
Johnson RM, Brummett R, Schleuning A. Use of alprazolam for relief of tinnitus. A double-blind study. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1993; 119:842.
Slattery WH, Fisher LM, Iqbal Z, et al. Intratympanic steroid injection for treatment of idiopathic sudden hearing loss. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2005; 133:251.
Garduño-Anaya MA, Couthino De Toledo H, Hinojosa-González R, et al. Dexamethasone inner ear perfusion by intratympanic injection in unilateral Ménière's disease: a two-year prospective, placebo-controlled, double-blind, randomized trial. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2005; 133:285.
Shim HJ, Song SJ, Choi AY, et al. Comparison of various treatment modalities for acute tinnitus. Laryngoscope 2011; 121:2619.
Tunkel DE, Bauer CA, Sun GH, et al. Clinical practice guideline: tinnitus executive summary. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2014; 151:533.
Hoekstra CE, Rynja SP, van Zanten GA, Rovers MM. Anticonvulsants for tinnitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011; :CD007960.
Rosenberg SI, Silverstein H, Rowan PT, Olds MJ. Effect of melatonin on tinnitus. Laryngoscope 1998; 108:305.
Rarey KE, Yao X. Localization of Cu/Zn-SOD and Mn-SOD in the rat cochlea. Acta Otolaryngol 1996; 116:833.
McFadden SL, Ding D, Burkard RF, et al. Cu/Zn SOD deficiency potentiates hearing loss and cochlear pathology in aged 129,CD-1 mice. J Comp Neurol 1999; 413:101.
Cassandro E, Sequino L, Mondola P, et al. Effect of superoxide dismutase and allopurinol on impulse noise-exposed guinea pigs--electrophysiological and biochemical study. Acta Otolaryngol 2003; 123:802.
Arda HN, Tuncel U, Akdogan O, Ozluoglu LN. The role of zinc in the treatment of tinnitus. Otol Neurotol 2003; 24:86.
Ochi K, Kinoshita H, Kenmochi M, et al. Zinc deficiency and tinnitus. Auris Nasus Larynx 2003; 30 Suppl:S25.
Yetiser S, Tosun F, Satar B, et al. The role of zinc in management of tinnitus. Auris Nasus Larynx 2002; 29:329.
Paaske PB, Pedersen CB, Kjems G, Sam IL. Zinc in the management of tinnitus. Placebo-controlled trial. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1991; 100:647.
Vernon JA, Meikle MB. Masking devices and alprazolam treatment for tinnitus. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 2003; 36:307.
Hobson J, Chisholm E, El Refaie A. Sound therapy (masking) in the management of tinnitus in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010; :CD006371.
Lipman RI, Lipman SP. Phase-shift treatment for predominant tone tinnitus. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2007; 136:763.
Hoare DJ, Edmondson-Jones M, Sereda M, et al. Amplification with hearing aids for patients with tinnitus and co-existing hearing loss. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014; :CD010151.
Parazzini M, Del Bo L, Jastreboff M, et al. Open ear hearing aids in tinnitus therapy: An efficacy comparison with sound generators. Int J Audiol 2011; 50:548.
Konopka W, Zalewski P, Olszewski J, et al. Tinnitus suppression by electrical promontory stimulation (EPS) in patients with sensorineural hearing loss. Auris Nasus Larynx 2001; 28:35.
Steenerson RL, Cronin GW. Treatment of tinnitus with electrical stimulation. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1999; 121:511.
Kapkin O, Satar B, Yetiser S. Transcutaneous electrical stimulation of subjective tinnitus. A placebo-controlled, randomized and comparative analysis. ORL J Otorhinolaryngol Relat Spec 2008; 70:156.
Seidman MD, Ridder DD, Elisevich K, et al. Direct electrical stimulation of Heschl's gyrus for tinnitus treatment. Laryngoscope 2008; 118:491.
Van de Heyning P, Vermeire K, Diebl M, et al. Incapacitating unilateral tinnitus in single-sided deafness treated by cochlear implantation. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 2008; 117:645.
Axelsson A, Andersson S, Gu LD. Acupuncture in the management of tinnitus: a placebo-controlled study. Audiology 1994; 33:351.
Park J, White AR, Ernst E. Efficacy of acupuncture as a treatment for tinnitus: a systematic review. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2000; 126:489.
Meng Z, Liu S, Zheng Y, Phillips JS. Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation for tinnitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011; :CD007946.
Folmer RL, Theodoroff SM, Casiana L, et al. Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation Treatment for Chronic Tinnitus: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2015; 141:716.

Topic 6856 Version 42.0
GRAPHICS
Causes of hearing loss








Conductive




Outer-ear causes




Congenital microtia or atresia




External otitis




Trauma




Squamous cell carcinoma




Exostosis




Osteoma




Psoriasis




Cerumen




Middle-ear causes




Congenital atresia or ossicular chain malformation




Otitis media




Cholesteatoma




Otosclerosis




Tympanic membrane perforation




Temporal bone trauma




Glomus tumors










Sensorineural




Inner-ear causes




Hereditary hearing loss




Congenital viral infections




Congenital malformations




Presbycusis




Meningitis




Thyrotoxicosis




Viral cochleitis




Ototoxic drugs




Otologic surgery




Meniere disease




Noise exposure




Barotrauma




Penetrating trauma




Acoustic neuroma




Meningioma




Autoimmune disease




Multiple sclerosis




Cerebrovascular ischemia




Arnold-Chiari malformation 




Otosyphilis








Graphic 53903 Version 4.0
Some of the drugs that cause or exacerbate tinnitus




Aminoglycoside antibiotics




ACE inhibitors




Antimalarial drugs (eg, chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine)




Benzodiazepines




Bismuth




Calcium channel blockers




Carbamazepine




Chlordiazepoxide




Cisplatin




Clarithromycin




COX-2 inhibitors




Cyclobenzaprine




Dapsone




Doxazosin




Doxepin




Fluoroquinolone antibiotics




Isotretinoin




Lidocaine and other local anesthetics




Loop diuretics




Nitroprusside




Prazosin




Proton pump inhibitors




Quinidine




Salicylates and NSAIDs




Sertraline




Sibutramine




Tricyclic antidepressants




Tolbutamide




Valproic acid




ACE: angiotensin-converting enzyme; COX: cyclooxygenase; NSAIDs: nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs.